<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Afterword</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="part-1" epub:type="part">
			<section id="afterword" epub:type="afterword">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Editor’s Postscript</h3>
				<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Lavengro</i> and <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Romany Rye</i> (properly <i xml:lang="rom">Romanó Ráï</i>) were terms applied to George Borrow in his youth by the Norfolk Gypsy, Ambrose Smith, better known in these volumes as Jasper Petulengro. The names signify respectively “Philologist” and “the Gypsy Gentleman.” The two works thus entitled constitute a more or less exact autobiography of the writer of them, from the date of his birth to the end of <time datetime="1825-08">August, 1825</time>. The author himself confesses in his Preface that “the time embraces nearly the first quarter of the present century.”</p>
				<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Lavengro</i> was written at Oulton, in Suffolk, slowly and at intervals, between the years <time datetime="1842">1842</time> and <time datetime="1851">1851</time>. The <abbr>MSS.</abbr> exist in three varieties: 1. The primitive draft of a portion, found scattered through sundry notebooks and on isolated scraps of paper, as described in the letter to Dawson Turner (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 394) 2. The definitive autograph text in one thick quarto volume. 3. The transcript for the printers, made by <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Borrow, in one large folio volume, interlarded with the author’s additions and corrections.</p>
				<p>The text of the present edition reproduces with fidelity the first issue of <time datetime="1851">1851</time>. Occasionally a verbal alteration, introduced by the author himself into his second edition of <time datetime="1872">1872</time>, has been adopted in this, whenever it seemed to improve the reading. In general, however, that reprint was in many respects a defective one. Not only words, but even whole sentences, which had escaped the printers, remained undetected by the editor, and, as a consequence, were lost to later impressions, based, as they all have been, on that issue. We should have preferred to alter, quietly and without remark, certain errors in the text, as we did in the documents published in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life</i>; but save in a single instance, we have left such inaccuracies intact, reserving all corrections for the place where we might be supposed to exercise a free hand.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-217" id="noteref-217" epub:type="noteref">217</a></p>
				<p>The insertion, with brackets of course, of the promised inedited episodes, caused in two cases some embarrassment. In removing them from the final form of his <abbr>MS.</abbr>, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Borrow closed up the gap with a few fitting lines which concealed the withdrawal. These words had to be suppressed on the restoration of the passages.</p>
				<p>The insertions will be met with as follows:⁠—</p>
				<ul>
					<li>
						<p>The Poet Parkinson, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 119⁠–⁠25.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>The Wake of Freya, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 128⁠–⁠33.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Cromwell’s Statue and the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Dairyman’s Daughter</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 196⁠–⁠98.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Portobello or the Irish Patriot, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 231⁠–⁠39.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Thomas d’Éterville, in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Notes</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 558⁠–⁠59.</p>
					</li>
				</ul>
				<p>Thus we have made a full statement as regards the text of the present reprint. Anyone who takes up this edition will discover no visible name, or preface, or introduction, save only those of George Borrow, from the title to the close. The book is, therefore, “all Borrow,” and we have sought to render the helping hand as inconspicuous as possible. Should, however, the prejudiced stumble at the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Notes</i>, we can say in the language of the fairy smith of Loughmore: <i xml:lang="ga">is agad an t-leigheas</i>, you have the remedy in your own power.</p>
				<p>Speaking of the Notes, they have been drawn up on the unimpeachable testimony of contemporaneous record. Especially have we sought the works which <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Borrow was accustomed to read in his younger days, and at times with curious results. [...] <!-- A list of these is given at the close of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Romany Rye</i>, and is referred to in these notes as “Bibliography” for the sake of concision.--> What is not here explained can be easily looked up in our <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life, Writings, and Correspondence of George Borrow</i>, London, <time datetime="1899">1899</time>, which of itself furnishes a sufficient and unalterable exhibition of the facts concerning the man and his work.</p>
				<footer>
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. I.</abbr> Knapp.</p>
					<p>High <abbr>St.</abbr>, Oxford,<br/>
					<time datetime="1899-11">November, 1899</time>.</p>
				</footer>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
