<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XLVII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-2" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-2-47" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title ordinal z3998:roman">XLVII</h3>
				<p>Leaving Horncastle I bent my steps in the direction of the east. I walked at a brisk rate, and late in the evening reached a large town, situate at the entrance of an extensive firth, or arm of the sea, which prevented my farther progress eastward. Sleeping that night in the suburbs of the town, I departed early next morning in the direction of the south. A walk of about twenty miles brought me to another large town, situated on a river, where I again turned towards the east. At the end of the town I was accosted by a fiery-faced individual, somewhat under the middle size, dressed as a recruiting sergeant.</p>
				<p>“Young man,” said the recruiting sergeant, “you are just the kind of person to serve the Honourable East India Company.”</p>
				<p>“I had rather the Honourable Company should serve me,” said I.</p>
				<p>“Of course, young man. Well, the Honourable East India Company shall serve you⁠—that’s reasonable. Here, take this shilling; ’tis service-money. The Honourable Company engages to serve you, and you the Honourable Company; both parties shall be thus served; that’s just and reasonable.”</p>
				<p>“And what must I do for the Company?”</p>
				<p>“Only go to India; that’s all.”</p>
				<p>“And what should I do in India?”</p>
				<p>“Fight, my brave boy! fight, my youthful hero!”</p>
				<p>“What kind of country is India?”</p>
				<p>“The finest country in the world! Rivers, bigger than the Ouse. Hills, higher than anything near Spalding! Trees⁠—you never saw such trees! Fruits⁠—you never saw such fruits!”</p>
				<p>“And the people⁠—what kind of folk are they?”</p>
				<p>“Pah! Kauloes⁠—blacks⁠—a set of rascals not worth regarding.”</p>
				<p>“Kauloes!” said I; “blacks!”</p>
				<p>“Yes,” said the recruiting sergeant; “and they call us lolloes, which in their beastly gibberish, means reds.”</p>
				<p>“Lolloes!” said I; “reds!”</p>
				<p>“Yes,” said the recruiting sergeant, “kauloes and lolloes; and all the lolloes have to do is to kick and cut down the kauloes, and take from them their rupees, which mean silver money. Why do you stare so?”</p>
				<p>“Why,” said I, “this is the very language of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Petulengro.”</p>
				<p>“<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pet⁠—?”</p>
				<p>“Yes,” said I, “and Tawno Chikno.”</p>
				<p>“Tawno Chik⁠—? I say, young fellow, I don’t like your way of speaking; no, nor your way of looking. You are mad, sir; you are mad; and what’s this? Why your hair is grey! You won’t do for the Honourable Company⁠—they like red. I’m glad I didn’t give you the shilling. Good day to you.”</p>
				<p>“I shouldn’t wonder,” said I as I proceeded rapidly along a broad causeway, in the direction of the east, “if <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Petulengro and Tawno Chikno came originally from India. I think I’ll go there.”</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
