<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XLV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-1" id="chapter-1-45" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLV</h3>
			<p>In pursuance of my promise to the old woman, I set about procuring her a Bible with all convenient speed, placing the book which she had entrusted to me for the purpose of exchange in my pocket. I went to several shops, and asked if Bibles were to be had: I found that there were plenty. When, however, I informed the people that I came to barter, they looked blank, and declined treating with me, saying that they did not do business in that way. At last I went into a shop over the window of which I saw written, “Books bought and exchanged:” there was a smartish young fellow in the shop, with black hair and whiskers. “You exchange?” said I. “Yes,” said he, “sometimes, but we prefer selling; what book do you want?” “A Bible,” said I. “Ah,” said he, “there’s a great demand for Bibles just now; all kinds of people are become very pious of late,” he added, grinning at me; “I am afraid I can’t do business with you, more especially as the master is not at home. What book have you brought?” Taking the book out of my pocket, I placed it on the counter. The young fellow opened the book, and inspecting the titlepage, burst into a loud laugh. “What do you laugh for?” said I, angrily, and half clenching my fist. “Laugh!” said the young fellow; “laugh! who could help laughing?” “I could,” said I; “I see nothing to laugh at; I want to exchange this book for a Bible.” “You do?” said the young fellow; “well, I daresay there are plenty who would be willing to exchange, that is, if they dared. I wish master were at home; but that would never do, either. Master’s a family man, the Bibles are not mine, and master being a family man, is sharp, and knows all his stock; I’d buy it of you, but, to tell you the truth, I am quite empty here,” said he, pointing to his pocket, “so I am afraid we can’t deal.”</p>
			<p>Whereupon, looking anxiously at the young man, “what am I to do?” said I; “I really want a Bible.”</p>
			<p>“Can’t you buy one?” said the young man; “have you no money?”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said I, “I have some, but I am merely the agent of another; I came to exchange, not to buy; what am I to do?”</p>
			<p>“I don’t know,” said the young man, thoughtfully, laying down the book on the counter; “I don’t know what you can do. I think you will find some difficulty in this bartering job, the trade are rather precise.” All at once he laughed louder than before; suddenly stopping, however, he put on a very grave look. “Take my advice,” said he; “there is a firm established in this neighbourhood which scarcely sells any books but Bibles; they are very rich, and pride themselves on selling their books at the lowest possible price; apply to them, who knows but what they will exchange with you?”</p>
			<p>Thereupon I demanded with some eagerness of the young man the direction to the place where he thought it possible that I might effect the exchange⁠—which direction the young fellow cheerfully gave me, and, as I turned away, had the civility to wish me success.</p>
			<p>I had no difficulty in finding the house to which the young fellow directed me; it was a very large house, situated in a square, and upon the side of the house was written in large letters, “Bibles, and other religious books.”</p>
			<p>At the door of the house were two or three tumbrils, in the act of being loaded with chests, very much resembling tea-chests; one of the chests falling down, burst, and out flew, not tea, but various books, in a neat, small size, and in neat leather covers; Bibles, said I⁠—Bibles, doubtless. I was not quite right, nor quite wrong; picking up one of the books, I looked at it for a moment, and found it to be the New Testament. “Come, young lad,” said a man who stood by, in the dress of a porter, “put that book down, it is none of yours; if you want a book, go in and deal for one.”</p>
			<p>Deal, thought I, deal⁠—the man seems to know what I am coming about⁠—and going in, I presently found myself in a very large room. Behind a counter two men stood with their backs to a splendid fire, warming themselves, for the weather was cold.</p>
			<p>Of these men one was dressed in brown, and the other was dressed in black; both were tall men⁠—he who was dressed in brown was thin, and had a particularly ill-natured countenance; the man dressed in black was bulky, his features were noble, but they were those of a lion.</p>
			<p>“What is your business, young man?” said the precise personage, as I stood staring at him and his companion.</p>
			<p>“I want a Bible,” said I.</p>
			<p>“What price, what size?” said the precise-looking man.</p>
			<p>“As to size,” said I, “I should like to have a large one⁠—that is, if you can afford me one⁠—I do not come to buy.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, friend,” said the precise-looking man, “if you come here expecting to have a Bible for nothing, you are mistaken⁠—we⁠—”</p>
			<p>“I would scorn to have a Bible for nothing,” said I, “or anything else; I came not to beg, but to barter; there is no shame in that, especially in a country like this, where all folks barter.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, we don’t barter,” said the precise man, “at least Bibles; you had better depart.”</p>
			<p>“Stay, brother,” said the man with the countenance of a lion, “let us ask a few questions; this may be a very important case; perhaps the young man has had convictions.”</p>
			<p>“Not I,” I exclaimed, “I am convinced of nothing, and with regard to the Bible⁠—I don’t believe⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Hey!” said the man with the lion countenance, and there he stopped. But with that “Hey” the walls of the house seemed to shake, the windows rattled, and the porter whom I had seen in front of the house came running up the steps, and looked into the apartment through the glass of the door.</p>
			<p>There was silence for about a minute⁠—the same kind of silence which succeeds a clap of thunder.</p>
			<p>At last the man with the lion countenance, who had kept his eyes fixed upon me, said calmly: “Were you about to say that you don’t believe in the Bible, young man?”</p>
			<p>“No more than in anything else,” said I; “you were talking of convictions⁠—I have no convictions. It is not easy to believe in the Bible till one is convinced that there is a Bible.”</p>
			<p>“He seems to be insane,” said the prim-looking man, “we had better order the porter to turn him out.”</p>
			<p>“I am by no means certain,” said I, “that the porter could turn me out; always provided there is a porter, and this system of ours be not a lie, and a dream.”</p>
			<p>“Come,” said the lion-looking man, impatiently, “a truce with this nonsense. If the porter cannot turn you out, perhaps some other person can; but to the point⁠—you want a Bible?”</p>
			<p>“I do,” said I, “but not for myself; I was sent by another person to offer something in exchange for one.”</p>
			<p>“And who is that person?”</p>
			<p>“A poor old woman, who has had what you call convictions⁠—heard voices, or thought she heard them⁠—I forgot to ask her whether they were loud ones.”</p>
			<p>“What has she sent to offer in exchange?” said the man, without taking any notice of the concluding part of my speech.</p>
			<p>“A book,” said I.</p>
			<p>“Let me see it.”</p>
			<p>“Nay, brother,” said the precise man, “this will never do; if we once adopt the system of barter, we shall have all the holders of useless rubbish in the town applying to us.”</p>
			<p>“I wish to see what he has brought,” said the other; “perhaps Baxter, or Jewell’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Apology</i>, either of which would make a valuable addition to our collection. Well, young man, what’s the matter with you?”</p>
			<p>I stood like one petrified; I had put my hand into my pocket⁠—the book was gone.</p>
			<p>“What’s the matter?” repeated the man with the lion countenance, in a voice very much resembling thunder.</p>
			<p>“I have it not⁠—I have lost it!”</p>
			<p>“A pretty story, truly,” said the precise-looking man, “lost it!”</p>
			<p>“You had better retire,” said the other.</p>
			<p>“How shall I appear before the party who entrusted me with the book? She will certainly think that I have purloined it, notwithstanding all I can say; nor, indeed, can I blame her⁠—appearances are certainly against me.”</p>
			<p>“They are so⁠—you had better retire.”</p>
			<p>I moved towards the door. “Stay, young man, one word more; there is only one way of proceeding which would induce me to believe that you are sincere.”</p>
			<p>“What is that?” said I, stopping and looking at him anxiously.</p>
			<p>“The purchase of a Bible.”</p>
			<p>“Purchase!” said I, “purchase! I came not to purchase, but to barter; such was my instruction, and how can I barter if I have lost the book?”</p>
			<p>The other made no answer, and turning away I made for the door; all of a sudden I started, and turning round, “Dear me,” said I, “it has just come into my head, that if the book was lost by my negligence, as it must have been, I have clearly a right to make it good.”</p>
			<p>No answer.</p>
			<p>“Yes,” I repeated, “I have clearly a right to make it good; how glad I am! see the effect of a little reflection. I will purchase a Bible instantly, that is, if I have not lost⁠—” and with considerable agitation I felt in my pocket.</p>
			<p>The prim-looking man smiled: “I suppose,” said he, “that he has lost his money as well as book.”</p>
			<p>“No,” said I, “I have not;” and pulling out my hand I displayed no less a sum than three half-crowns.</p>
			<p>“O, noble goddess of the Mint!” as Dame Charlotta Nordenflycht, the Swede, said a hundred and fifty years ago, “great is thy power; how energetically the possession of thee speaks in favour of man’s character!”</p>
			<p>“Only half a crown for this Bible?” said I, putting down the money, “it is worth three;” and bowing to the man of the noble features, I departed with my purchase.</p>
			<p>“Queer customer,” said the prim-looking man, as I was about to close the door⁠—“don’t like him.”</p>
			<p>“Why, as to that, I scarcely know what to say,” said he of the countenance of a lion.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
