<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Glossary</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="glossary" epub:type="glossary">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Glossary</h2>
			<section id="glossary-a">
				<h3 epub:type="title">A</h3>
				<dl>
					<dt id="abdalrahman" epub:type="glossterm">
						<dfn>Abdalrahman</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd epub:type="glossdef">
						<p>(Ab-dal-rahˈman), founder of the independent Ommiad (Saracenic) power in Spain, conquered at Tours by Charles Martel.</p>
					</dd>
				</dl>
			</section>
		</section>
		<h3>LIST OF GYPSY WORDS IN <i>LAVENGRO</i></h3>
		<p><b>Adrey</b>, in.</p>
		<p><b>Ambról</b>, pear.</p>
		<p><b>Andé</b>, in, into.</p>
		<p><b>André</b>, in, within.</p>
		<p><b>Angár</b>, charcoal, coals.</p>
		<p><b>Apopli</b>, again.</p>
		<p><b>Aukko</b>, here is.</p>
		<p><b>Ava</b>, yes.</p>
		<p><b>Ávali</b>, yes.</p>
		<p><b>Avella</b>, comes, is coming.</p>
		<p><b>Baró</b>, large, big.</p>
		<p><b>Bawlor</b>, swine.</p>
		<p><b>Bebee</b> (aunt), grandmother.</p>
		<p><b>Bengui</b>, devil.</p>
		<p><b>Bitchadey</b>, pl. sent.</p>
		<p><b>Bitchadey pawdel</b> (<abbr>p.</abbr> 300), an error for <i>bitchadó pawdel</i>, sing.</p>
		<p><b>Boró</b>, great.</p>
		<p><b>Borodromengro</b>, highwayman.</p>
		<p><b>Boro foros</b>, London.</p>
		<p><b>Cafi</b>, horse-shoe nail.</p>
		<p><b>Cana</b>, when.</p>
		<p><b>Caulor</b>, shillings.</p>
		<p><b>Chabé</b>, pl. of</p>
		<p><b>Chabó</b>, child, lad, Gypsy.</p>
		<p><b>Chachipen</b>, truth.</p>
		<p><b>Chal</b>, lad, Gypsy.</p>
		<p><b>Chal Devlehi</b>, go with God, farewell.</p>
		<p><b>Chavó</b>, <i>i.q. chabó</i>.</p>
		<p><b>Chi</b>, girl, lass, Gypsy.</p>
		<p><b>Chinomescro</b>, chisel.</p>
		<p><b>Chipes</b>, pl. tongues.</p>
		<p><b>Chive</b>, to throw; pass (bad money).</p>
		<p><b>Chivios</b>, he or it is cast.</p>
		<p><b>Chong</b>, hill.</p>
		<p><b>Chong gav</b>, Norwich.</p>
		<p><b>Churi</b>, knife.</p>
		<p><b>Coor</b>, to strike, hammer.</p>
		<p><b>Cooromengro</b>, boxer.</p>
		<p><b>Covantza</b>, anvil.</p>
		<p><b>Dearginni</b> (Hung. G.), it thunders.</p>
		<p><b>Dinelo</b>, a fool, silly.</p>
		<p><b>Divvus</b>, day.</p>
		<p><b>Dloovu</b>, money (for <i>lovo</i>).</p>
		<p><b>Dook</b>, to bewitch, to spirit away.</p>
		<p><b>Dook</b>, spirit, soul, divining spirit, demon, ghost.</p>
		<p><b>Dosta</b>, enough.</p>
		<p><b>Dovey odoi</b>, that there, up yonder.</p>
		<p><b>Drab</b>, herb, poison.</p>
		<p><b>Drab</b>, to poison.</p>
		<p><b>Drom</b>, road, way.</p>
		<p><b>Drow</b> (often pl.), drugs; poison.</p>
		<p><b>Dui</b>, two.</p>
		<p><b>Dukker</b><b><i>in</i></b> (the <i>in</i> is Eng. “ing”), any one’s fortune, or fortunes, fate, fortune-telling.</p>
		<p><b>Dukker</b><b><i>in</i></b><b>dook</b>, the fortune-telling or divining spirit or demon.</p>
		<p><b>Dukkeripen</b>, fortune-telling.</p>
		<p><b>Duvel</b>, God.</p>
		<p><b>Duvelskoe</b>, divine.</p>
		<p><b>Engro</b> (mere <i>ending</i>), Borrovian for “master,” “fellow,” “chap”.</p>
		<p><b>Foros</b>, city, town.</p>
		<p><b>Gav</b>, village, town.</p>
		<p><b>Gillie</b>, song, ditty.</p>
		<p><b>Gorgio</b>, non-gypsy, stranger, somebody, police. G. avella, some one is coming. G. shunella, some one is listening. G.’s welling, the police are about.</p>
		<p><b>Gorgious</b>, adj. formed from <i>gorgio</i>.</p>
		<p><b>Grandbabee</b>, see <i>bebee</i>.</p>
		<p><b>Grondinni</b> (<i>Roumanian</i> G.), it hails.</p>
		<p><b>Gry</b>, horse, pony.</p>
		<p><b>Harkomescro</b>, tinker.</p>
		<p><b>Hinjiri</b>, executioner.</p>
		<p><b>Hir mi Devlis</b>, by my G⁠—.</p>
		<p><b>Hokkeripen</b>, falsehood.</p>
		<p><b>Jaw</b>, to go. Jaw-ing, going.</p>
		<p><b>Jib</b>, tongue, language.</p>
		<p><b>Juggal</b>, dog.</p>
		<p><b>Juwa</b>, woman.</p>
		<p><b>Kauley</b>, f. of</p>
		<p><b>Kaulo</b>, black, dark.</p>
		<p><b>Kaulomescro</b>, blacksmith.</p>
		<p><b>Kaured</b>, stole.</p>
		<p><b>Kekaubi</b>, kettle.</p>
		<p><b>Ker</b>, house.</p>
		<p><b>Kosko</b>, good.</p>
		<p><b>Kral</b> or <b>Krallis</b>, king.</p>
		<p><b>Lachipen</b>, honesty.</p>
		<p><b>Lavengro</b>, “word-master,” “philologist”.</p>
		<p><b>Leste</b>, him.</p>
		<p><b>Lil</b>, book.</p>
		<p><b>Loovu</b>, coin, money.</p>
		<p><b>Lundra</b>, London.</p>
		<p><b>Luripen</b>, theft, robbery.</p>
		<p><b>Mailla</b>, donkey.</p>
		<p><b>Manricli</b>, cake.</p>
		<p><b>Manro</b>, bread.</p>
		<p><b>Manus</b>, man.</p>
		<p><b>Marel</b> (read <i>merel</i>), dies.</p>
		<p><b>Men</b>, we.</p>
		<p><b>Mensar</b> (read <i>mensa</i>), with us.</p>
		<p><b>Miro</b>, my.</p>
		<p><b>Morro</b>, bread.</p>
		<p><b>Muchtar</b>, tool-box.</p>
		<p><b>Nashkado</b>, lost, hanged.</p>
		<p><b>Nashky</b>, gallows.</p>
		<p><b>O</b>, the.</p>
		<p><b>Odoi</b>, there; dovey o., yonder.</p>
		<p><b>Pa</b>, over, for.</p>
		<p><b>Pal</b>, brother, friend, mate.</p>
		<p><b>Palor</b>, brothers.</p>
		<p><b>Parraco</b>, I thank.</p>
		<p><b>Pawdel</b>, on the other side, across; bitchadey p., transported.</p>
		<p><b>Pen</b>, to say, to tell; penning, telling.</p>
		<p><b>Peshota</b>, pl. bellows.</p>
		<p><b>Petul</b>, horse-shoe.</p>
		<p><b>Petulengro</b>, smith.</p>
		<p><b>Pindro</b>, hoof, foot.</p>
		<p><b>Pios</b>, health (in toasting).</p>
		<p><b>Plaistra</b>, pincers.</p>
		<p><b>Plastramengro</b>, runner, detective.</p>
		<p><b>Poknees</b>, magistrate.</p>
		<p><b>Prala</b> (<i>voc.</i>). brother.</p>
		<p><b>Pudamengro</b>, blower, bellows.</p>
		<p><b>Puró</b>, old, ancient.</p>
		<p><b>Puv</b>, earth, ground.</p>
		<p><b>Ran</b>, stick, cane.</p>
		<p><b>Rati</b>, blood, stock.</p>
		<p><b>Rikkení</b>, f. of</p>
		<p><b>Rikkenó</b>, pretty, fine.</p>
		<p><b>Rin</b>, file.</p>
		<p><b>Rom</b>, husband; Gypsy.</p>
		<p><b>Roman</b>, Borrovian for Gypsy.</p>
		<p><b>Romaneskoenæs</b>, in Gypsy fashion.</p>
		<p><b>Romanly</b> (Bor.), in Gypsy, G.-like.</p>
		<p><b>Romanó</b>, Gypsy.</p>
		<p><b>Rome and dree</b> (Rom andré?) Gypsy at heart.</p>
		<p><b>Romí</b>, wife.</p>
		<p><b>Rommanis</b>, in Gypsy.</p>
		<p><b>Rommany</b>, Gypsy.</p>
		<p><b>Rommany Chal</b>, Eng. Gypsy.</p>
		<p><b>Rommany Chi</b>, f. Eng. Gypsy-girl.</p>
		<p><b>Rovel</b>, weeps.</p>
		<p><b>Rye</b>, gentleman; farming r., farmer.</p>
		<p><b>Sap</b>, snake.</p>
		<p><b>Sapengro</b>, snake-catcher.</p>
		<p><b>Sastra</b>, iron.</p>
		<p><b>Sastramescro</b>, worker in iron, smith.</p>
		<p><b>Scoppelo</b>, ninny.</p>
		<p><b>Sherengro</b>, head man.</p>
		<p><b>Shoon</b>, to hear, to listen.</p>
		<p><b>Shukaro</b>, hammer.</p>
		<p><b>Shunella</b>, is listening.</p>
		<p><b>Si</b>, is, are.</p>
		<p><b>Sore</b>, all (who).</p>
		<p><b>Ta</b>, and.</p>
		<p><b>Tacho rommanis</b>, faithful wife.</p>
		<p><b>Tan</b>, tent.</p>
		<p><b>Tasaulor</b> (ta-sorlo), to-morrow.</p>
		<p><b>Tatchipen</b>, truth.</p>
		<p><b>Tawno Chickno</b>, “Shorty”.</p>
		<p><b>Tu</b>, thy.</p>
		<p><b>Tute</b>, thee.</p>
		<p><b>Vagescoe chipes</b>, tongues of fire.</p>
		<p><b>Villaminni</b> (Hung. G.), it lightens.</p>
		<p><b>Wafodo</b>, bad, false.</p>
		<p><b>Welling</b> (corruption of <i>avella</i>), coming. G.’s welling, “the hawks are abroad”.</p>
		<p><b>Wesh</b>, forest.</p>
		<p><b>Yag</b>, fire.</p>
		<p><b>Yeck</b>, one.</p>
		<p><b>Zigañ</b> (<i>Slavic</i>), Gypsy.</p>
		<p><b>Zingaro</b> (<i>Italian</i>), Gypsy.</p>
		<h3>COMPLETE LIST OF ENG. GYPSY WORDS SCATTERED THROUGH <i>LAVENGRO</i> AND <i>ROMANY RYE</i>.</h3>
		<p style="text-align: center"><i>Common European G. forms are in parenthesis</i>.</p>
		<p><b>Abri</b> (<i>avrí</i>), out, forth.</p>
		<p><b>Adré</b> / <b>Adrey</b> } (<i>andré</i>), in, into.</p>
		<p><b>Ambról</b>, a pear.</p>
		<p><b>Andé</b>, in, into.</p>
		<p><b>Angár</b>, charcoal, coal.</p>
		<p><b>Apopli</b>, again, once more.</p>
		<p><b>Ankko</b> (<i>aveká</i>), here is.</p>
		<p><b>Ava</b> / <b>Ávali</b> } yes.</p>
		<p><b>Avella</b> (3rd sing. of <i>aváva</i>), he comes; <i>gorgio a.</i>, some one is coming. [<i>Avava</i>, <i>avesa</i>, <i>avela</i>.]</p>
		<p><b>Ballúva</b> (<i>baló</i>), pork.</p>
		<p><b>Baló</b>, hog.</p>
		<p><b>Baró</b>, f. <i>barí</i>, pl. <i>baré</i>, big, great.</p>
		<p><b>Bátu</b>, father.</p>
		<p><b>Baulo</b>, see <i>baló</i>.</p>
		<p><b>Bawlor</b> (pl. of <i>baló</i>), swine.</p>
		<p><b>Bebee</b> (<i>bibí</i>), aunt; (in <i>G. B.</i> grandmother, with and without <i>grand</i>).</p>
		<p><b>Beng</b>, toad; dragon, devil.</p>
		<p><b>Bengui</b> (Sp. G. <i>bengue</i>), <i>i.q. beng</i>.</p>
		<p><b>Besh</b> (<i>beshava</i>), to sit.</p>
		<p><b>Beti</b>, a little, a <i>bit</i> of.</p>
		<p><b>Bitchadey</b> (<i>bichavdé</i>; pl. of <i>bichavdó</i>), sent. With <i>pawdel</i>, transported.</p>
		<p><b>Bokht</b> (<i>bakht</i>), fate, luck, fortune.</p>
		<p><b>Boró</b>, see <i>baró</i>.</p>
		<p><b>Borodromengro</b>, highwayman.</p>
		<p><b>Boshom</b> (<i>bashava</i>, I sing or play), violin, fiddle.</p>
		<p><b>Boshomengro</b>, fiddler.</p>
		<p><b>Bovaló</b> (<i>barvaló</i>), rich.</p>
		<p><b>Bute</b> (<i>but</i>), much. <i>B. dosta</i>, a good many, plenty of.</p>
		<p><b>Cafi</b> (καρφἱ), horse-shoe nail.</p>
		<p><b>Caloró</b>, f, a Spanish Gypsy. Dim. of <i>caló</i>; see <i>kaló</i>.</p>
		<p><b>Cambrí</b> (<i>kamní</i>), with child.</p>
		<p><b>Camomescro</b> (fr. <i>kamama</i>, I love), a Lovell (Gypsy tribe-name).</p>
		<p><b>Cana</b> (<i>kánna</i>), when.</p>
		<p><b>Caulor</b> (<i>collor</i>, L.L.), pl. shillings.</p>
		<p><b>Chabé</b>, pl. of Chabó.</p>
		<p><b>Chabó</b> (<i>tchavó</i>), child, lad; Gypsy.</p>
		<p><b>Chachipen</b> (<i>tchatchipé</i>), truth.</p>
		<p><b>Chal</b> (<i>chabál</i> or <i>chavál</i>, still existant in Spain), lad; Gypsy. <i>Romany ch.</i>, Gypsy; <i>R. chi</i>, Gypsy (lass).</p>
		<p><b>Chal</b> (for <i>jal</i>, from <i>java</i>). Ch. Devléhi (<i>ja Devlésa</i>), go with God, farewell.</p>
		<p><b>Chavó</b>, <i>i.q. chabó</i>.</p>
		<p><b>Chi</b> (<i>tchái</i>), girl, lass, child; Gypsy.</p>
		<p><b>Chibándo</b> (Sp. G., see <i>chive</i>), tossing; preaching (a sermon).</p>
		<p><b>Chick</b> (<i>tchik</i>), dirt, mud.</p>
		<p><b>Chie</b>, <i>i.q. chi</i>.</p>
		<p><b>Chiknó</b> (<i>tiknó</i>), a youth. <i>Tawno Ch.</i>, “Shorty”.</p>
		<p><b>Chinomescro</b> (from <i>tchinava</i>, I cut), chisel, parer.</p>
		<p><b>Chipe</b> (<i>tchip</i>), tongue.</p>
		<p><b>Chive</b> (<i>tchivava</i>), to throw; to pass (false coin).</p>
		<p><b>Chívios</b>, is cast (he).</p>
		<p><b>Chong</b> (<i>tumba</i>), hill. <i>Ch. gav</i>, Norwich, town of the Castle hill.</p>
		<p><b>Choomer</b> (<i>tchumi</i>), a kiss.</p>
		<p><b>Chore</b> (<i>tchorava</i>), to steal.</p>
		<p><b>Chories</b>, thieves.</p>
		<p><b>Chovahanee</b> (<i>tchovekhaní</i>), a witch.</p>
		<p><b>Chovahanó</b> (<i>tchovekhanó</i>), a wizard.</p>
		<p><b>Churi</b> (<i>tchorí</i>), knife.</p>
		<p><b>Coin</b> (<i>kon</i>), who?</p>
		<p><b>Coko</b> (<i>káko</i>), uncle.</p>
		<p><b>Colikó</b> (<i>kalikó</i>, Sp. G. <i>calicaste</i>, on the morrow), on the morrow, in the morning (B.’s “early” is a mistake).</p>
		<p><b>Coor</b> (<i>curava</i>, I strike), to strike, to hammer.</p>
		<p><b>Cooromengro</b>, boxer.</p>
		<p><b>Covántza</b>, anvil.</p>
		<p><b>Covar</b> (<i>ková</i>), a thing.</p>
		<p><b>Cral</b> / <b>Crállis</b> } (<i>krális</i>), king</p>
		<p><b>Cukkerin</b> (merely alliterative with <i>dukkerin</i>).</p>
		<p><b>Curomengro</b>, boxer.</p>
		<p><b>Czigány</b> (Hung.), Gypsy⁠—(<i>tsigáñ</i>).</p>
		<p><b>Dearginni</b> (Hung., <i>dörŏg</i>, thunder; <i>dörgeni</i>, to th.), it thunders.</p>
		<p><b>Dick</b> (<i>dikava</i>), to see.</p>
		<p><b>Dinelo</b> (<i>deniló</i> or <i>diniló</i>), a fool.</p>
		<p><b>Divvus</b> (<i>divés</i>), day.</p>
		<p><b>Dloovu</b> (error for <i>lovó</i>).</p>
		<p><b>Dook</b> (Slavic), spirit, soul, divining spirit, demon, ghost. Russ. <i>dux</i>.</p>
		<p><b>Dook</b>, to spirit away, to bewitch.</p>
		<p><b>Dosta</b>, enough.</p>
		<p><b>Dove odoy</b> (fr. <i>odová</i>), that there; up yonder.</p>
		<p><b>Drab</b>, herb, drug; poison, see <i>drow</i>.</p>
		<p><b>Drab</b>, to poison.</p>
		<p><b>Drabengro</b>, seller of medicines, apothecary. <i>D. ker</i>, apothecary’s shop.</p>
		<p><b>Drom</b> (δρόμος), road, way.</p>
		<p><b>Drow</b>, <i>i.q. drab</i>; often pl. drugs; poison.</p>
		<p><b>Dúi</b>, two.</p>
		<p><b>Duk</b> (B.’s <i>dook</i>).</p>
		<p><b>Dukker</b> (fr. <i>duk</i>, spirit or demon, and <i>ker</i>, to make, to evoke), to tell any one’s fortune, to tell fortunes.</p>
		<p><b>Dukkerin</b> (the <i>in</i> is Eng. ing), any one’s fortune or fortunes, fate; fortune-telling. “To pen” a <i>dukkerin</i> is incorrect.</p>
		<p><b>Dukkerin dook</b>, the fortune-telling or divining spirit.</p>
		<p><b>Dukkeripen</b>, fortune-telling.</p>
		<p><b>Dumo</b> (<i>dumó</i>), the back.</p>
		<p><b>Duvel</b> (<i>devél</i>), God.</p>
		<p><b>Duvelskoe</b> (<i>devlesko</i>), divine.</p>
		<p><b>Dye</b> (<i>daï</i>), mother.</p>
		<p><b>Engro</b> (a mere adj. ending, <i>er</i>, <i>ing</i>), Borrovian for “master,” “fellow,” “chap”.</p>
		<p><b>Erajái</b> (<i>rashaï</i>), priest, in Sp. Gyp.</p>
		<p><b>Eray</b>, see <i>rye</i>.</p>
		<p><b>Farm-engro</b>, farmer.</p>
		<p><b>Fino</b>, Eng. fine.</p>
		<p><b>Fóros</b> (<i>φόρος</i> = <i>ἀγορά</i>), city, town.</p>
		<p><b>Gav</b>, village, town.</p>
		<p><b>Gil</b>, to sing.</p>
		<p><b>Gillie</b> (<i>ghili</i>), song, ditty.</p>
		<p><b>Gitáno</b>, a (Sp.) Gypsy.</p>
		<p><b>Gorgikie</b>, f. of.</p>
		<p><b>Gorgiko</b>, f, non-gypsy.</p>
		<p><b>Gorgio</b> (<i>gadjó</i>), non-gypsy, stranger, somebody, policeman.</p>
		<p><b>Gorgious</b>, adj. formed from <i>gorgio</i>.</p>
		<p><b>Grandbebee</b>, grandmother. See <i>bebee</i>.</p>
		<p><b>Grasní</b>, mare; jade.</p>
		<p><b>Grondinni</b> (fr. <i>Roumanian</i>), it hails.</p>
		<p><b>Gry</b> (<i>graï</i>), horse. <i>Pellengo g.</i>, stallion.</p>
		<p><b>Gudló</b>, í, sweet; <i>g. pesham</i>, honeycomb.</p>
		<p><b>Gul eray</b> (Hung. G.?), sweet gentleman.</p>
		<p><b>Habben</b> (<i>khabé</i>, fr. <i>khavava</i>, I eat), food, victuals; feast.</p>
		<p><b>Harkomescro</b> (<i>arkíchi</i>, tin), tinker.</p>
		<p><b>Hatch</b>, to cook (evidently fr. <i>pekava</i>, rather than <i>atchava</i>).</p>
		<p><b>Hinjirí</b> (f. of <i>hinjiró</i>, fr. <i>djandjir</i>, a chain), executioner.</p>
		<p><b>Hir mi devlis</b> (or diblis), by G⁠—.</p>
		<p><b>Hokkawar</b> (khokhavava), to lie, to cheat.</p>
		<p><b>Hokkeripen</b>, falsehood, deception.</p>
		<p><b>Hors-worth</b>, pennyworth. (Hors, fr. <i>grosch</i>?)</p>
		<p><b>Iuziou</b> (<i>shuzó</i>), clean.</p>
		<p><b>Jaw</b> (<i>java</i>), to go. See <i>chal</i>.</p>
		<p><b>Jawing</b>, going.</p>
		<p><b>Jib</b> (<i>chib</i>) tongue, language.</p>
		<p><b>Juggal</b> (<i>jukél</i>), dog.</p>
		<p><b>Juva</b> / <b>Juwa</b> } (young) woman.</p>
		<p><b>Kair</b>, see <i>ker</i>.</p>
		<p><b>Kairdó</b>, see <i>Kerdó</i>.</p>
		<p><b>Kaló</b>, f. <i>kalí</i>, pl. <i>kalé</i>, black, dark.</p>
		<p><b>Kauley</b>, f. of <i>kaulo</i>.</p>
		<p><b>Kaulo</b>, see <i>kaló</i>.</p>
		<p><b>Kaulomescro</b>, blacksmith.</p>
		<p><b>Ke</b>, to.</p>
		<p><b>Kek</b>, none.</p>
		<p><b>Kekaubi</b> / <b>Kekkauvi</b> } (<i>kakkávi</i>), kettle.</p>
		<p><b>Kekauviskoe saster</b>, kettle iron or hook.</p>
		<p><b>Kekkaubi</b>, see <i>kekaubi</i>.</p>
		<p><b>Kekkenó</b>, no, not one.</p>
		<p><b>Ker</b>, house.</p>
		<p><b>Ker</b> (<i>kerava</i>), to make, to do.</p>
		<p><b>Kerdó</b>, made (he).</p>
		<p><b>Kil</b> (<i>kelava</i>), to play.</p>
		<p><b>Kin</b> (<i>kinava</i>), to buy.</p>
		<p><b>Kistur</b> (<i>klisava</i>), to ride.</p>
		<p><b>Kitchema</b>, tavern, ale-house.</p>
		<p><b>Kosko</b>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, good.</p>
		<p><b>Kral</b> / <b>Krallis</b> } king, see <i>cral</i>.</p>
		<p><b>Lachipen</b>, goodness.</p>
		<p><b>Laki</b> / <b>Lakie</b> } (<i>lake</i>), her, to her.</p>
		<p><b>Lavengro</b>, “word-master,” “philologist”.</p>
		<p><b>Lel</b> (<i>lava</i>, <i>lesa</i>, <i>lela</i>), to take; to buy.</p>
		<p><b>Len</b>, <i>i.q. lende</i>.</p>
		<p><b>Lende</b>, their, to them.</p>
		<p><b>Leste</b>, him.</p>
		<p><b>Levinor</b> (<i>levina</i>), ale.</p>
		<p><b>Lil</b>, paper, book.</p>
		<p><b>Lirí</b>, law.</p>
		<p><b>Lis</b>, it.</p>
		<p><b>Lolló</b> (<i>loló</i>), red.</p>
		<p><b>Loovu</b>, see</p>
		<p><b>Lovó</b>, coin; pl. <i>lové</i>, money.</p>
		<p><b>Lubbeny</b> (<i>lubní</i>), harlot.</p>
		<p><b>Lundra</b>, London.</p>
		<p><b>Luripen</b>, theft, robbery.</p>
		<p><b>Mailla</b>, donkey.</p>
		<p><b>Man</b>, me.</p>
		<p><b>Mande</b>, to me.</p>
		<p><b>Mang</b> (<i>mangava</i>), to beg.</p>
		<p><b>Manriclí</b> (<i>manrikló</i>), cake.</p>
		<p><b>Manró</b>, bread.</p>
		<p><b>Manus</b> (<i>manush</i>), man.</p>
		<p><b>Marél</b> (error for <i>merel</i>): <i>merava</i>, <i>meresa</i>, <i>merela</i>⁠—he dies.</p>
		<p><b>Mek</b> (<i>mukava</i>), to leave, to let; <i>mek lis</i>, drop it.</p>
		<p><b>Men</b>, we.</p>
		<p><b>Mensar</b> (<i>mensa</i>), with us.</p>
		<p><b>Mer</b> (<i>merava</i>), to die.</p>
		<p><b>Mi</b> (<i>me</i>), I.</p>
		<p><b>Miduveleskoe lil</b>, divine or godly book.</p>
		<p><b>Miró</b>, f, my, mine.</p>
		<p><b>Miry</b> (<i>mirí</i>), my.</p>
		<p><b>Morro</b>, bread.</p>
		<p><b>Muchtar</b> (<i>muktar</i>), box, tool-box.</p>
		<p><b>Mullo</b> (<i>muló</i>), dead.</p>
		<p><b>Nashkadó</b>, í (<i>nashavdó</i>), lost, ruined; hanged (<i>G. B.</i>).</p>
		<p><b>Nashky</b>, gallows (<i>G. B.</i>).</p>
		<p><b>Nav</b>, name.</p>
		<p><b>O</b>, the.</p>
		<p><b>Odoi</b> / <b>Odoy</b> } there, here.</p>
		<p><b>Opré</b>, on, upon, up.</p>
		<p><b>Pa</b>, over, for.</p>
		<p><b>Pal</b> (<i>pral</i>), brother; friend, mate.</p>
		<p><b>Palor</b> (<i>pralá</i>), brothers.</p>
		<p><b>Parraco</b> (L.L. <i>paracrow</i>; Zinc. parauco), I thank.</p>
		<p><b>Patteran</b> (<i>patrín</i>), leaf of a tree, Gypsy trail.</p>
		<p><b>Pawdel</b> (<i>perdál</i>), on the other side, across.</p>
		<p><b>Pellengo</b> (<i>pelengro</i>, fr. <i>pelé</i>, testicles), with <i>gry</i>, a stallion.</p>
		<p><b>Pen</b> (<i>penava</i>), to say, to tell.</p>
		<p><b>Peshotá</b>, pl. of <i>peshót</i> (<i>pishót</i>), bellows.</p>
		<p><b>Petúl</b> (<i>pétalo</i>), horse-shoe.</p>
		<p><b>Petulengro</b>, head of the clan “Smith”.</p>
		<p><b>Pindró</b> (<i>pinró</i>), foot, hoof.</p>
		<p><b>Pios</b> (fr. <i>piava</i>, I drink), health, in toasting.</p>
		<p><b>Piramus</b>, <i><abbr>MS.</abbr></i> Priamus.</p>
		<p><b>Plaistra</b> (<i>klashta</i>), pincers, tongs.</p>
		<p><b>Plastramengro</b>, runner, detective.</p>
		<p><b>Poggadó</b>, í (<i>panghiardó</i>), broken.</p>
		<p><b>Poknees</b> (<i>paknís</i>, a man of trust), magistrate.</p>
		<p><b>Prala</b>, voc. of <i>pal</i> or <i>pral</i>, brother.</p>
		<p><b>Pré</b> (<i>opré</i>), on, upon.</p>
		<p><b>Pudamengro</b> (fr. <i>purdava</i> or <i>pudava</i>, I blow), bellows.</p>
		<p><b>Puró</b>, f. <i>purí</i>, pl. <i>puré</i>, old, ancient.</p>
		<p><b>Pus</b>, straw.</p>
		<p><b>Puv</b> (or <i>phuv</i>) earth, ground.</p>
		<p><b>Ran</b>, stick, rod, cane.</p>
		<p><b>Ráni</b>, lady, wife.</p>
		<p><b>Rarde</b> (<i>ratt</i>), night.</p>
		<p><b>Rat</b>, rate and rati, blood, race.</p>
		<p><b>Rawnie</b>, see <i>ráni</i>.</p>
		<p><b>Rig</b> (?) to carry.</p>
		<p><b>Rikkeno</b>, see <i>rinkenó</i>.</p>
		<p><b>Rin</b>, a file.</p>
		<p><b>Rinkenó</b>, í, pretty, fine.</p>
		<p><b>Rom</b>, husband; Gypsy.</p>
		<p><b>Roman</b>, Borrovian tor Gypsy.</p>
		<p><b>Romaneskoenaes</b>, in Gypsy fashion.</p>
		<p><b>Romanies</b>, Gypsies.</p>
		<p><b>Romanly</b>, in Gypsy, Gypsy-like.</p>
		<p><b>Romanó</b>, í, Gypsy.</p>
		<p><b>Romany</b> (Anglicised form <i>of Romanó</i>, í), Gypsy.</p>
		<p><b>Romany Chal</b>, Gypsy.</p>
		<p><b>Romany Chi</b>, Gypsy (girl).</p>
		<p><b>Romany Rye</b>, Gypsy gentleman.</p>
		<p><b>Rome and dree</b> (Rom andré? Gypsy at heart).</p>
		<p><b>Romí</b>, wife.</p>
		<p><b>Rommanis</b>, in Gypsy, also wife (<i>G. B.</i>).</p>
		<p><b>Rommany</b>, <i>i.q. Romany</i>.</p>
		<p><b>Rové</b>l (3rd sing. of <i>rovava</i>), he weeps.</p>
		<p><b>Rup</b>, silver.</p>
		<p><b>Rye</b> (<i>ráï</i>), gentleman.</p>
		<p><b>Sanpriel</b>, Sanspareil.</p>
		<p><b>Sap</b>, snake.</p>
		<p><b>Sapengro</b>, snake-catcher.</p>
		<p><b>Sar shan</b>, how art thou?</p>
		<p><b>Sas</b>, it was, were it.</p>
		<p><b>Saster</b> / <b>Sastra</b> } iron.</p>
		<p><b>Sastramescro</b>, worker in iron, smith.</p>
		<p><b>Saulo</b> (<i><abbr>MS.</abbr> sorlo</i>), morning; early (?)</p>
		<p><b>Savó</b>, what kind of a man? who?</p>
		<p><b>Scoppelo</b>, ninny.</p>
		<p><b>Se</b> (<i>isi</i>), is, are.</p>
		<p><b>Shan</b> (<i>isán</i>), thou art.</p>
		<p><b>Sherengro</b> (fr. <i>sheró</i>, the head), head man, chief.</p>
		<p><b>Shom</b> (<i>isóm</i>), I am.</p>
		<p><b>Shoon</b> (<i>shunava</i>), to hear, to listen.</p>
		<p><b>Shukaro</b> (<i>tchokanó</i>), hammer.</p>
		<p><b>Shunella</b> (<i>shunéla</i>, 3rd sing. of <i>shunava</i>), is listening.</p>
		<p><b>Si</b> (<i>isí</i>), is, are; <i>si men</i>, are we; <i>si mensar</i> (mensa), is or are with us.</p>
		<p><b>Sinaba</b> (Sp. G.), was.</p>
		<p><b>Sore</b> (<i>saré</i>), pl. all, all who.</p>
		<p><b>Sos</b>, who.</p>
		<p><b>Sos</b> (<i>isás</i>), was.</p>
		<p><b>Sove</b> (<i>sovava</i>), to sleep.</p>
		<p><b>Swety</b> (pl. of Russ. <i>sviet</i>), people, folks.</p>
		<p><b>Synfye</b>, Cinthia (Slav. <i>th</i> is pron. <i>ph</i>).</p>
		<p><b>Ta</b>, and.</p>
		<p><b>Tachó</b>, í, true.</p>
		<p><b>Tan</b>, place, tent.</p>
		<p><b>Tasaulor</b> (read <i>ta-sorlo</i>), to-morrow.</p>
		<p><b>Tatchenó</b>, í, modest, chaste.</p>
		<p><b>Tatchipen</b>, truth.</p>
		<p><b>Tawnie</b>, f. of</p>
		<p><b>Tawnó</b>, í. (<i>tarnó</i>), little, short.</p>
		<p><b>Tove</b> (<i>tovava</i>), to wash.</p>
		<p><b>Trin</b>, three.</p>
		<p><b>Truppo</b> (<i>trupo</i>), body.</p>
		<p><b>Tu</b>, thou.</p>
		<p><b>Tute</b> (tut), thee, to thy.</p>
		<p><b>Vagescoe</b>, adj. of <i>yag</i>.</p>
		<p><b>Vassavie</b>, f. of.</p>
		<p><b>Vassavó</b>, í, vile.</p>
		<p><b>Villaminni</b> (Hung. <i>villám</i>), it lightens.</p>
		<p><b>Wafodo</b>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, bad, raise.</p>
		<p><b>Wel</b> (corrupted from <i>avella</i>), to come, to go.</p>
		<p><b>Welling</b>, coming.</p>
		<p><b>Wendror</b> (connected with <i>andró</i>, within?), the insides.</p>
		<p><b>Wesh</b> (<i>vesh</i>), forest.</p>
		<p><b>Wust</b>, to throw (better the first <i><abbr>MS.</abbr></i> form, <i>chiv</i>).</p>
		<p><b>Yag</b>, fire.</p>
		<p><b>Ye</b>, the.</p>
		<p><b>Yeck</b> (<i>yek</i>), one.</p>
		<p><b>Yov</b> (<i>ov</i>), be.</p>
		<p><b>Zigeuner</b> (Ger.), Gypsy.</p>
		<p><b>Zingaro</b> (It.), Gypsy.</p>
	</body>
</html>
